I just got to say I'm Marcia Marnie and it's Friday May the 17th 2019.
Oh wasn't you just telling about the kitty catcher?
Well, I should have said it in that phrase should I?
No!
But you had, what do you call them now?
That's OK.
Thanks Dennis.
That's all right, no problem.
Truant officer.
Hi, that might have been it.
But as kids you were, you know.
And he used to go around, you know, making sure that...
He was on his bike?
Yeah, yeah, we were all on our bikes, you know.
And I can laugh about when I first started school I went at four
because my youngest brother used to take me on the crossbar
because it was, well, it was always space in the little local school.
So Cushing tied on the crossbar and he pedaled me down to...
Colcliffe School?
Colcliffe School.
Oh my goodness, on the crossbar?
On the crossbar, yeah.
And I had about six months with it before he left because he left at 15 then.
And then I used to pedal the bike down.
And of course, living so far up the lane, our local policeman always had...
Well, he was on his bike and he used to wait on the other end of the lane for me
and we'd pedal to school.
He would pedal to school with you?
Yeah, because perhaps I was a little chopsy girl, I don't know,
but he'd know all the news because I'd be telling him all that was happening,
you know, around.
Oh my goodness.
And that was every morning.
And he used to come up here and have a cup of tea with my mam and all that, you know.
He said, I know what's going on, I know what's going on.
He said all around, he said, because every morning I'd wait for a cat on the end of the road,
sit there on my bike.
How lovely. What was his name?
Mr. Harrison.
Did he live on the...
He lived at the police station down there.
We had a police station...
Where was the police station?
On your way down, you'd have gone to Margaret's.
There was a row of houses.
The police station was opposite.
Not far from Mr. Corks.
Oh really?
The police station was there on the left-hand side.
Mr. and Mrs. Harrison.
Did he wear a proper uniform?
Oh yeah.
And one of those hats?
Yeah.
And we'd pedal.
I'd be pedalling down, he'd be there waiting for me, and off to school.
Of course he'd say, I was so and so.
Of course.
I'd know, because this was like a whole house.
They'd come down to my dad, or one or the other, you know.
So I'd know all the news as a kid.
And you always had to listen and be quiet.
You never had to...
How can I put it?
If dad had somebody in, or mum only off the top row,
you were allowed to sit in the room.
But you didn't have to, you could go on playing, but you didn't have to open your mouth.
But you were listening.
Oh yeah.
So of course I used to relay it.
Oh that's such a lovely image.
Him, his bike, you on your little bike.
Yeah, pedalling down the lane.
Look at him, he'd be sat on the bottom there by Grove Farm.
Right, off we'd go then.
I'd still see his son now.
Well, he's...
Yeah, there was always people in the range.
Yeah, really.
Yeah, you'd always see a car in or something in the range, you know.
But you peddled your bike, and what I thought about...
Well, my childhood anyway.
My daughter, I was a bit like it when I had...
My two were a boy and a girl, right?
I'd read to them and all, you know.
But when I was small, there was nothing.
We had no electric, we had nothing.
So you had...
No electric here?
No, not until the coronation of Queen Elizabeth.
This one now, wasn't it?
Was I 11?
Would I have been 11 then?
You were 78 now?
Yeah.
Why?
53 you got electricity here.
So what did you have before?
A tilly lamp and a table lamp on the table with the...
What you call it, mantle, wasn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah, you had the ordinary lamp with the mantle.
And then, I've still got it in the other room.
Mam had a lamp which...
There was a wick that you turned up.
Like a sickle.
And that's all we had.
We had...
We didn't have...
I remember Main's Water coming to a year.
I would have been about seven.
What did you have before?
Out of the well.
There's a well in the garden?
You walk by it.
Well, by there you'll see the pump.
It still works.
No.
Really?
Yeah.
You've got to prime it now.
That's amazing.
Just put the thing off.
I'll show it to you when you go out.
Put the thing off the top.
Pour a little drop of water in.
I suppose...
No, hang on.
That's the swell...
You don't pump water now.
Yeah.
So was that one of your jobs?
No.
I don't think it was trusted.
The boys done that.
My job was when I was small,
because they hand washed.
Mother had a lady come in every Monday.
Only on a Monday.
I wash every day now, but only on a Monday.
And...
Auntie Annis, she lived on the top road there.
And she'd be a washing.
But when I was home from school,
right, holiday time,
my job was to turn the mango.
Oh.
Turn the mango.
Yeah.
Yeah, it was common.
Well, yeah, turn it.
That was my job.
So Mam and her was on the dolly board and what have you.
And after they'd rinsed the water,
there was...
They used to light a fire, look, to boil the washing.
The big old boilers.
They hadn't long been took out.
What, in the...
In the office.
Yeah, outside now.
Oh, my goodness.
There was two boilers,
and the washing would be put in,
and they'd put the lid on, sort of thing.
Then they'd be pulling them out with like...
Was it a dolly?
I don't know.
It had like a round handle,
and they used to pull the washing out into a bath.
Yeah, but not those wooden tongs things.
Yes.
Yeah.
Thank you.
When I tell my kids sometimes,
my grandchildren, they says,
Nan, I didn't realise you lived in the Ark ages.
And I was lucky being the youngest.
We bathed in front of the fire at night in the kitchen,
look, open fire.
What, in the tomb?
In the long bath.
Did you really?
Yeah.
And I was always first in.
Now, Mam had to go and get this water,
because she'd like that for water for us, you know.
Yeah.
Only once a week we had a bath.
And that was on a Sunday night.
Didn't we?
Yeah.
On a Sunday night?
You had a, I was first in.
Yeah.
And then, Mamma kept topping up the water.
My brothers, my two younger, well, next to me,
seven and nine years older,
they'd be next in the bath, then the oldest one,
then Dad, then Uncle lived with us, Dad's brother.
And Mam was always last.
And they'd tell me,
I was the youngest in the family.
And Mam was always last.
And they'd tip it out, and the fire was going.
And you had a candle to go to bed.
I still got my candle stick now.
Have you really?
The one you used as a child?
Yeah, which you put your handle in,
it was enamel, wasn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
So I still got that now.
And you'd go upstairs.
I don't, you know, but you'd take your candle upstairs.
And sometimes my uncle would be up there reading me a story,
because I was the youngest, right?
Sometimes you had a warm drink to go to bed with you.
And sometimes Mam would come along,
and go to sleep, and she'd come upstairs,
I'm going to sleep now.
No, put the candle out in case it went to fire.
She had like a little V thing that put over the...
Oh, like a little snuffer?
Yeah.
Candle snuffer.
Yeah, put over that.
And you had a good sleep then, didn't you?
I liked it.
But it was happy days, because they always played with us.
Yeah.
You either played cards, which was snap or whatever,
you played cards, you played drives, snakes and ladders.
Did you have a radio?
Yes.
And it was about that big, a bit on the front.
That went years ago, though.
I think it was his master's voice, if I can remember.
The radio was called.
You know.
You had to be quiet.
They always listened to the arches.
So don't ask me what time that was on.
Seven o'clock, normally.
Right.
Well, you had to be quiet.
And then you could listen to anything.
Now, my father used to do rabbits on the wall with the candlelight, you know.
Somehow, and you'd have shadows on the wall.
Shadow puppets.
Yeah.
He'd do it with his hands.
So somehow, you know, I can remember that now.
What was his name?
John.
Yeah.
John Johnson?
No, no, John Hale.
I was a Hale.
Hale H?
A-L-E.
Yeah.
And your mother's name?
Ruby Victoria.
That's a nice name.
Dad was John Valentine, because he was born on the 14th of February.
Oh.
And Mam was Ruby Victoria.
So.
So where was your father from?
Redwick.
He was from Redwick?
He avenged the, yes, from Redwick, my father was from.
He was born in Redwick Brick House, Parkes is Brick House, the big house.
Yeah.
He was born there.
And he buried in Redwick, my mother and my two brothers, you know, over there.
Oh, really?
Redwick.
So I said I'm going to Redwick.
I know I was born here.
But, yeah.
Was your mother from Redwick?
Yes.
Oh.
Yeah.
So.
What brought them here then, Caz?
Right, well, we didn't own, well they didn't own it then.
My gran and grandpa retired from Brick House in Redwick, and they came to live at Fair
Orchard Farm, Nash.
Well, Dad had got married then, and he'd gone out to Lentarnham to live, the other side
of Newport.
Yeah.
Dad and Mam.
Then, Uncle, who were never married, he moved down to the farm on Pycorna, right by the
drainage board, the one on the straight road, not Pycorna Farm, there's one on the side,
didn't I, just go by that there.
He moved down there, but not to live with his mum and dad, he moved there on his own.
Well then, my gran and grandpa, who I never knew any of my grandparents, and I decided
they'd died before I was born, they, she wasn't very well, and Dad only had one sister, and
she lived up us, and got married and went to us to live, and went very well.
So, things along the line, Dad and Mam, and two children, came back, yes, Bill and I was
born here, came back from Lentarnham to live with Uncle, not with the mother and father,
to look after, or be near to his father, like you know, my grandfather, and they nursed
them at home, the two of them there, and then they didn't want to go to live in Fair Orchard,
well there was two others, and I suppose perhaps paying somebody out or something, but the
oldest brother bought it, and he moved there.
Well then this farm came up, and Uncle and Dad sort of merged together, and they said
they'd rent this farm, and they moved here.
Well then Bill was born here, and I was born here.
So you've been here all your life?
Yeah, in the room up above this one.
Really, you were actually born in the house?
In the house, and I moved down the land in a bit, and I'm looking over the back now,
you know.
Oh my goodness.
Yes, I was actually born here.
So did your mother, was there a local midwife?
Yes, she lived on the top road where you would have come down, Broad Street Common, Nurse
Adams.
Nurse Adams?
Yeah.
Really?
Nurse Adams.
That's where she lived, very nice lady, she was there quite a long while after.
So do you think she was midwife to lots of babies born around here?
Yeah, yeah, she was midwife.
Oh gosh.
So what sort of farm was it?
Was it large dog, or?
It was cows and calves, and Dad used to do a bit of dealing as well, he'd go to Gloucester
Market, and buy milk and cows and sell them to the other dairy farmers.
He dealt a bit.
Oh really?
And Uncle didn't, no Uncle stayed home here, you know, you're sure.
I think we had nothing, do you know what I mean?
Yeah.
But we were happy.
There was happy times where, how can I put it, well there was always somebody coming
in.
You seem happy.
Yeah.
You know, it was always, and now, like Dennis, he's come down now, he knows where everything
is.
So as a child, did you have to work on the farm?
Did you have a day job?
I did when I was 70, well, that was the scenario, I got through to grammar school when I was
77, I passed my exam and I went to Chepstow, Larkfield on the hill at Chepstow, but because
I was this side of the pond, if we did, in our yard where you've pulled in, if I'd have
been the other side of the pond, I'd have only had a canterbeze lick.
But because of this side of the pond, then I missed out on quite a few things, because
in those days, you used to be able to belong to the netball team after school, after activities,
you could never stay behind, because we didn't have a car at that stage.
So how did you get to school?
Oh, well, it used to be, Mr Jones used to take us to school, and he used to also haul
cars into market in a van, quite a big van.
Well on a Wednesday, if he didn't have time to sweep out, he'd put the benches in, back
in for us and we got in the van.
Oh, that's fantastic!
We had a lovely time, and then his son took over, and his son used to pick us up in the
mornings, I used to have to be on the, because we had to catch the bus on Crosshands in Newport
now, we had to catch that bus, the quarter past eight bus at the Crosshands, so picking
up around here, I had to be on the top road by seven o'clock.
And I didn't get home at night, until the quarter past four from there, and then he
used to have to pick us up and bring us and deliver us all around like at night.
I used to come in the house year at the earliest, about quarter to six, six o'clock.
It was a long day.
It was a long day, but the Edmaster was ever so good to us, because we used to do our own
work on the bus.
There was only nine of us, nine of us wanted on the, he picked up, from Nashwich, yeah,
I mean we do our own work on the bus, didn't we?
And if one had it wrong, we all had it wrong.
But he was marvellous, Colonel Webb he was, his name was.
Colonel Webb?
Yeah, the Edmaster, and the first time he had us up outside of his door for copying,
well you know it was suspicious, wasn't it?
Well then when we explained what time we get home, when it was time to go to bed, when
you got home you had a bit of tea, I mean, and you couldn't do it in the morning, because
it couldn't help.
And he said, oh that's alright, he said, do as you want to do, he said, you know, we
laughed over it, but the first time he had us up for copying on work.
I mean if you all had it right it was fine, but sometimes you know, you'd all have a little
input, no, no, that ain't right, no, that ain't right, so we just go for the...
So you, when were you at school then, there, what year would that have been?
Er, when I was born in 41 and I would have been 11 when I passed my 11 plus.
41, 51, 52.
I'd have been 11, I started in 11, so I'd have started in the September lock.
September of 52, so 52, ok, yeah, ok, ah.
Yeah, it was then.
Well then, I always wanted to be a policewoman, don't ask me why, when I was at school, yeah,
I don't know why.
Probably getting a right, left, school, the local bobby.
I always wanted to be a policewoman, but it didn't materialise, because I left at 16,
right, did my exams, left at 16 and came home.
Mam won very well and in those days I suppose the girl had to, yeah, and my dad had a heart
attack and he died at 58.
So of course, mother and uncle and my two brothers, well it would be three brothers
until the other one got married, was here, so I came home to work then.
I've enjoyed it, I've been on the farm ever since.
Oh.
I do the book work now, well I've done the book work, well I've done the vat and all
that ever since it came out.
Well done you, because that's not the easy thing to do.
Oh, I do the vat, I do have an inspection every so often, but I'm alright.
What about Goldcliff School then, you went there?
Yeah, I went to Goldcliff and that's where we had the 11 plus, we sat there, look.
Well actually in the school?
The school, in the school.
Did you?
Yeah, yeah.
So it must have been a good school because a lot of you passed.
We had two, they were lovely too, Mrs Ayo, funny enough, no relation to us, no.
She used to live at Land of Any, Megal, you know Land of Any, and Mrs Shepherd we had,
she used to come down from Pontypool, bus it into Newport and bus down, she didn't have
a car.
Well, because Dad was Redwick, Mrs Ayo knew, well she was a Miss James first and then she
married Jim Ayo, I'd always sit on her lap if I was tired and I always had to have a
bra strap.
You always had to have a bra strap?
No, I wouldn't go to sleep, she used to nurse me and I had to get in there to Oldis to go
to sleep with a bra strap.
That's so sweet.
And then if I won very well she had a car, didn't she?
So she'd bring me home.
Oh.
Leave my bike in school because you know, I mean, they could always get me down, I always
had plenty of bikes, they did, yeah, but she'd bring me home.
She was a teacher apparently when I was born and she'd come up to see Mam the day I was
born, the day after I was born in the school down there.
It was like a community more then, wasn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, well.
You knew everybody.
Everybody you knew and you'd see somebody in the lane, well you knew him, he was either
from around, and years ago, like, well no, it was always Caldecott and Wentz, look, the
men used to trim the, by hand the reens and all by hand, right?
A bit like that, that sort of thing, that sort of thing.
Oh that's a scythe.
Yeah.
It used to be like a hook, a hook, yeah that's a scythe for the grass.
Like a long stick.
Yeah.
And they'd be doing the banks now where the tractors do it, they all done it by hand.
Really?
Yes.
Have you seen that?
Yes, I mean, we used to see him, have a talk to him.
Alf Stevens was one of them, Ernie Stevens, Billy England, oh Cox, oh dear, John Cox,
they'd be all out trimming the reens, yeah.
So they'd be teams of men?
Yeah, trimming along, yeah.
Really?
There was no, well there wasn't tractors then.
What sort of time of year would they normally do that?
Well it didn't really bother about the birds and all that, did it?
I shouldn't say that.
Well it was a different time.
Yeah, and they'd do it about, as the grass, oh I should think it would be April, May.
And would they be doing it on their land or?
No, everybody, they'd be doing our main reen.
Yeah?
They'd be doing all their main reens, all by hand.
All by hand.
Yeah, yeah.
Big job.
And they used to keep it under.
Say no more!
Say no more?
No.
Did they ever clear it out?
Clear the stuff out of the reen?
No, only by raking, if there was a blockage, they had like a big old, about that big I
think it was, yeah, and they'd just only pull it onto the bank.
Really?
They never ditched anything out of it.
Like a rake?
Yeah, yeah.
If there was a blockage that could block the water going under the arches, they'd pull
it out on the side.
Yeah.
Oh, did you ever do that?
No.
No?
I knew how the reens used to flow, because as a little girl, I think Mum wanted to get
rid of us sometimes, and if Dad was walking to the reens, going along thinking the water
reen coming as well as it should do, you know there's got to be a blockage, he'd take you
with him.
I used to love it.
And nobody would believe me when we had new ones, they went over to all these levels,
you know, right, so water runs down the middle, don't it?
So I told him, who's the one that I told and he didn't believe me where our water come
from?
Our water in the ditches from here comes from Nasharch.
Does it really?
And it wanders its way down and it gets into that when it comes out and then goes into
Chappalee.
He said, no, no, no, no, I'll pump your water, because it was that very dry, he said, oh,
about 30 years, we had a very dry time.
76.
Yeah.
We had a very dry time.
And he said, oh, we'll pump your water, because I said, you can't.
Yes, he said, of course you can pump water.
He said, you can't.
But they pumped for two days and they shut the pump off at night because the water was
running down here.
He was pumping up here, wasn't he?
But when they shut it, they took levels.
Yeah.
And he wouldn't believe me that our water comes from Nasharch and I said, well, as a
little girl, we walked up those fields and we got there, you'd have a blockage.
So dad had pulled the blockage out.
That is so interesting.
And you're really listening to your dad.
Oh, yeah.
Well, you sort of, where?
I suppose I was sparked by my background.
Perhaps being the only girl.
You sound like a bright little girl.
Being the only girl, I think.
I think the boys were mums.
No mum was good to me.
But I think I was dad's girl.
Dad died at 58, so of course I was only 17.
But he knew very well how his reams ran.
He knew that.
We'd walk by and say, it was lovely.
And I tell you another thing he used to take me, and I loved it.
Birds nesting.
Never to take any eggs out of the nest.
You just walked and he'd say, listen, and you'd like tweet it.
And you'd look, oh, there would be sometimes just one on there, but then you'd see little
babies in the nest.
We'd done all that with him.
With your dad?
Would you know what the birds were?
Yeah.
And I tell you another thing he used to take me with him.
Roses.
He used to love grafting roses.
Now you walk around the hedges and find the best dogbriar.
You know, that'd be a thick one.
And he'd tie a little bit of raffia, whitey stuff around it.
Well, then he'd go and dig it up.
Later on in the autumn, I think, he'd dug it up.
Yeah, it was the autumn.
Then you grafted, didn't you, in the autumn?
Yeah.
He'd take off his rose's ear and he'd graft it.
And he'd put like muck around it, like clay.
Then he'd wrap this raffia around it.
Oh, it ain't cool.
But that's how he had these standard roses.
Good dogbriar.
That's lovely.
You know, I look at all these things.
And now when my grandchildren, well, and my two, went into Newport to schools,
because they took the boundary, took us in, just up the road,
I didn't realise till my boy went to school.
He is 53 this time and my girl's 49.
Yeah, it is, I can't think.
You forget, don't you?
It's a different world.
Completely different world.
Because, how can I put it, they wasted too much.
I used to love going to the jumble sales at the school
because they'd throw out a skirt because the zip had gone.
Beautiful clothes.
And you get it for 10p.
I'd come home, you know, only had to put a zip in.
You know, but it was a completely different way of living.
And I didn't realise that until they started school.
Would you say yours was a very outdoor life?
Yes, outdoor, but you didn't waste anything, get me?
I mean, even to making cake and all that,
you used a, what was there, I mean, if the cream went a little bit sour,
you put it in a cake or in a scone, it'd make a lovely light scone.
Not really gone off, you know, but just not tainted.
I still use yogurts or whatever now.
If a yogurt is out of date, as long as it hasn't blown, it goes in a cake.
That's lovely.
Where did your milk come from? Did you buy milk?
No, we always had a house cow.
Where the calf and Dad milked it or my brothers milked it,
or I've had a milk sometimes, you know.
If they weren't yearning, every morning the cow read the calf.
But you had the milk first, you didn't let them run free.
The calf was in the pen and you had your milk.
Did you make butter and cheese?
Yes, still got the churn, the old wooden churn and the glass churn is still here.
Did you ever have to do that?
So once you made the butter, where did you...?
I got the pats and all, you were in it with, you know, you pat the...
Yeah?
Yeah.
Gosh.
Yeah, it's...
This is what I think a lot of my grandchildren are losing out,
because they think you buy everything out of a shop.
I'm sorry.
They're on the farm but they go to town schools.
Yeah.
What about pig? Did you have a family pig?
Yes, yeah, we had a pig.
And Dad used to kill a lamb, which he shared.
There were three of them, Mr. Waters up the road and what you call over there.
Well, he was another Mr. Waters, but he won a relation.
It's strange.
And my grandmother was a Waters, but she was relations to only one of them.
We're all really on the moors mixed up with one another on the farm.
I don't think they travel very far.
What about... So you know you've got reams all around you.
From an early age were you told to keep away from them?
Yes.
What did your parents say?
They'd tell us never play near a ream, because if you fall in you might not get out.
Because some of the reams have got a base around you.
They're not all clay. Well, people suck you down.
And you were never to play near a ream.
Never to talk to strangers, but I never seen any strangers.
Oh, yeah.
Because you knew everybody.
And Dad used to cut people's hair.
And he'd come in and say, oh, yes, he'd trim the...
I still got his cutters in the old drawer outside.
Really, Cuff? So people would come to your kitchen and he would cut their hair?
Yeah.
What, quite regularly?
I'll always remember.
Just men or women's?
Oh, Dad done women too. He used to cut mine.
But he did do the next door neighbors and a couple, you know, they'd come and he'd do it.
Never had no training, but he'd cut the hair, the hand clippers and all that.
And it's ever so funny because on a Sunday morning, this man used to come to dinner every Sunday.
I didn't know who he was, because you had to be...
I was being about six then, I expect.
Seen but not heard?
Yeah. So you didn't ask questions, but they didn't talk a lot then, did they?
Our mother didn't seem to talk a lot.
And he'd be here every Sunday to dinner and I'd think, oh.
Then Mum said to him, now that's your Uncle Morgan.
Well, I had an auntie Claire up the road, no relation, and Auntie Annis and all those, no relations with her.
And Uncle Morgan, asked me, Uncle Morgan.
Why wonder where does he live?
Well, every Sunday he was at dinner with our mam.
It turned out he was our mam's brother.
Really?
Yeah. He said, you're coming home with me today?
Am I?
Yeah, you can go. You can go, because Auntie Anna wants to see you.
Oh. Well, we peddled all up the moor.
He lived at Land of Any, right by the railway line, where the bridge goes off.
Was it Whitehall, the farm right by the railway line?
Well, he lived right by there.
Well, we'd go and sit in the house, but he had eight children.
Wow.
I stayed there. I wonder why mam had packed my...
It was then when I found out he was mam's brother.
Because mamma never told me, should you go in and stay up there? So that was my holiday then.
It was your holiday, how funny.
Yeah. And I had a couple of days up there.
And then we peddled up like that. Well, he'd already told me that I was their cousin, and you know.
We slept three in a bed.
Two on that end, one at the other end, you know.
The girls and me.
Had you peddled everywhere in those days, Michael?
Yeah. But what I couldn't cope with, because the house was so near the railway line, and we are so quiet here,
oh, those blooming trains, they'd rattle by.
Would they be the steam train then?
Yeah, but they'd be going quite fast, and they'd carry on talking.
But I couldn't hear a thing. They must have got oblivious to the noise, and they'd be talking away, and I couldn't hear a thing.
And in bed at night, there weren't many at night, mind.
I suppose today there's trains all the time, but you go to bed and you hear, oh, this blooming train, you hear it coming down the line, you know.
And it'd be more or less the house was only like from here to that wall over there from the actual train.
But that man that came in every Sunday was Mums Weather.
So as a child, what sort of games did you play?
Opscotch, skipping, climbing trees, falling out many a time.
Did you ever swim in the reams despite being a cockatoo?
No.
No boating or jumping over them?
No, except that day when my two brothers trod on my hands going over.
What about the sea wall? Did you ever go down there?
No, that was the walk from school, our nature walk from school.
Yeah.
Because you never went like they do abroad and all they do today.
You either went down a lane, you went up the sea wall, or you took nature walks.
So what did you do on the sea wall?
There's a little bit of sand on the one side.
You'd walk in, the fisheries used to be there, they used to catch the fish, look.
Yeah.
And then you'd walk in there and play on this little bit of sand.
And there was always tea rooms down there because there used to be a big house called the Temporous Hotel.
A three-storey house at the sea wall, they took it down.
Where was that?
Right as you drive down to the, go down the sea, right to the sea wall as far as you can go.
You don't mean Porton?
No, no.
The actual Clifton Court one.
Oh, the little cafe there?
Yeah.
Well, the cafe used to be in the house before that.
When I was a kid.
Yeah.
But there was a house the other side right on the sea wall, Temporous Hotel it was called.
I've not heard of that before.
Yeah, I remember Temporous.
Yeah, three-storey house.
Newtons lived in it, Mr. and Mrs. Newton, Bill Newton lived in it.
Really?
And there's another story.
If you go over the New Southern Bridge and you come to England, as you look on the left,
there's a house there, three-storey, exactly the same as the one that used to be down there.
They took it down.
Down there.
Really?
Yeah, you'll see it on the left-hand side.
They took it down because they wanted to do something to the sea wall and they moved it.
Yeah, when they widened the wall, yeah.
Wait a minute.
70s?
70-something?
Yes.
Well, she was still living in the whole house when her son got lost on the Southern Bridge.
70-something?
What, he got lost in 60-something?
He got lost?
What do you mean?
Well, he was working on the Southern Bridge and he was getting in his car on the... he'd
finished his shift.
Yeah.
And an alarm went off and he rushed back in and he got in the boats and he never ever found
his body.
They reckoned he'd got under one of the other boats or something.
There's a thing about it on the telly.
Oh yeah, there was a program on it about telly.
Really?
It was the only funeral I remember my dad going to.
Oh, sorry.
No, my brother's going to where there was no body.
Mam's sister lived the other way on the sea wall then.
Yeah.
But when she was ill, she'd give me two and sixpence anti-D.E.C. did to go and do her ironing.
So I used to ride down to Mrs. Newton's and walk the sea wall all the way down there to
do her ironing and come back.
Two and sixpence if she had a lot of ironing, two shillings if it was a small iron.
So, it depended on...
How far along the sea wall did you...
Oh, Grimineck, Mildermore.
Really?
You walked, yeah, to there, come back, pedal my back home.
So the Temperance Hotel, was it a hotel?
People would go there...
At one stage, but not when Newton's was there.
Yeah.
Mrs. Newton, who used to wait, I used to put my bike in her coal house in her shed on the
side, and she'd wait until I'd come back, see me walk back along the sea wall and have
a few words with me and I'd pedal home then.
Really?
But you knew everybody, see?
Yeah.
And Mam used to go there.
Well then, Auntie Daisy moved from there then, and she moved where Margaret Russell used
to live on the Cardcliffe and Court.
Oh, really?
Um...
She moved there.
Did you ever go out into the estuary and walk out there or swim in the river there?
No, we used to walk out, but I tell you what, we used to go more than anywhere.
It was down...
Oh, not Saltmash, there was a lot of grass.
Yeah.
Oh, what's that lane where you go to Nash Church?
Walk on down there.
Oh, I know where you go, yeah.
And down there, there was a lot of grass.
Yeah.
And it was lovely to go and you could watch the ships come in through the dock down there,
look.
Oh, really?
You'd be watching the ships coming into the dock.
Yeah.
And then we used to have a ride sometimes on our bikes, because you never took shopping
with your mam in those days, right?
And to see the shops when I was about 13, we used to go over the transporter bridge,
pedal our bikes up the main street of town.
Pedal your bikes to Newport?
Yeah, we'd pedal our bikes down where the transporter bridge is in Traston Road.
And you went across on the transporter bridge?
Up where the cross on the transporter bridge.
Pedal our bikes up town, looking in the shop windows, right?
Yeah.
And then come on along down Chepstral Road, turn off at the crosshands and pedal on.
And that was not everything, it was only in the summer.
You'd see lovely shoes, you'd see everything, you know.
But you had to have plain Jane when you went to school, didn't you?
Oh my God, that's such a lovely story.
We used to have fun as kids, I mean, we had no money.
No money, no?
Were there any shops in the parish?
Yes, sure, shop on the end of Straits Lane.
And there was one down by Eskmouth, it was a post office, Thomas's, Moorcroft.
And there was one in Whitsun, yeah, she used to do post office and pension, she didn't have a shop.
She just had the actual pensions.
And the post got delivered and the post lady had pedaled around with mail.
Really?
Yeah, get delivered there, I mean, they'd pedaled around with the mail.
Our mail used to come from Lamburn, yeah, they'd come over the railway line.
Really?
Yeah, there was a railway line there, look, you could go up there, pedal over and get over into Langston if you wanted to.
Do you remember the butcher ranks out there at Porton?
Yes.
Yes?
Yes, yes, I remember all those.
My cousin used to fetch the salmon in.
Who's your cousin?
Baker, oh he's been dead years now.
That was Auntie Daisy, used to go and do the ironing is, right there, yeah.
And I tell you who used to do it here at the seawall down here, it all belonged to the same fishing, Burgess I think used, and then Williams's, it was Burgess.
Yeah, I've heard the name Burgess.
And then I think Williams's bought it after he died.
Yes, because they had, he's still living down there, one of the Williams's.
Really, yeah, Adrian Williams.
That's it, yes, he's living down there.
Yeah.
I've seen him for years, and then Martin Hazel lives in Hill Farm, on the top.
Hazel's origin, his father and my, his mother and my father are first cousins.
Oh really?
Yeah, I told you they didn't go very far did they?
No.
She was a hale.
So your cousin used to fetch the salmon?
Yeah, well he used to go out with a little tractor to fetch it in, and in the house there where he lived, down Auntie Daisy, right by there, they had slabs, called slabs.
Yeah.
And they'd put the, he'd go and get them out of the pouches and then put them in his place for them to come and collect.
Oh my goodness.
The salmon, see the salmon there, they look nice too.
So was this at Goldcliff?
That was at Goldcliff.
Yeah.
Well then what you call owls used to do it at, by Hazel's, then by Williams's.
What you call, not Tudor owls.
Windham.
Windham owls.
Did you know him?
Yes.
Really?
Yes, yeah he was lovely, he knew us all, he did.
What was he like, because I got some photographs of him.
Yeah.
Erm.
Is that all he did, was he just a fisherman?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, Windham yeah, father than that.
Did you ever get fish from there, or did you ever fish?
No, no.
The only fishing I ever done was, well we lost it all now when the steel has come.
My father used to like eels.
Yes.
So the bean sticks that he used to get, the stick for the runner beans, you'd add a bit
of wire on it and a nook, stick it in the bank and then go back at night to see if you caught
any in the rain.
Yeah.
Oh yeah, I used to catch them like fun.
Really?
Yeah, and I tell you what we used to see, and I don't know whether they're there now,
down the bottom of Chappel Ream before it goes out to sea, right, you'd see bunches
of eels, you know they.
Elvers.
Elvers, yeah, they'd be there in bunches.
Yes, I've heard this.
Yeah.
But you could see them.
Oh yeah, they were like.
Like big club flat.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Really?
Yeah, oh aye.
So you used to go and watch that?
Yeah.
Well the thing is, what else was there to watch around you?
Did anyone ever eat Elvers here?
Not the Elvers, but Dad liked the eels.
So when he caught the eel, did he bring it back?
I'd go down and look and fetch it back, Rod as well.
You'd fetch it back?
Rod as well, only on the end of our road.
Yeah?
Yeah.
How many would you have, just the one?
Well if you took three bean sticks down with you and he'd come and show you how to push
it in the bank, well then you didn't go back till about two or three hours, and you could
have three.
And he used to love them, Mam used to boil them for him.
So did she skin them first?
Yeah.
She'd have an old sink outside where she'd put them in.
Oh, and she boiled them?
Mm-mm.
Don't ask me how she'd done it, but she boiled them.
So did that stop when landlorn went up?
It went, well yes you got dirt would come in the water, which he said they wouldn't
pollute, but they did.
And you could go out sometimes and they'd have something burst over there.
Oh, I mean, did they have arsenic or cyanide over there?
And all the fish would be up on top of the water dead.
You actually saw that?
Really?
Yeah.
And that was in Monks Pill, and, because like Monks Pill joins us down here look, just down
the road.
Yeah.
And, yeah, they'd be floating on top of the water.
They'd had a leak, didn't they, or something over there, and nobody's seen anything would
they?
Do you remember when landlorn was being constructed?
Yeah.
What was that like?
Terrible for us along here, because the lorries, which was all in the shale and all that, you'd
see, well it wasn't safe to go out on the roads really, because they'd be coming up
fast.
They'd be in hedges, they'd be everywhere.
You'd see a lorry, they did, you'd see, you know, they were everywhere.
And you didn't want to go into the main of Newport, because there was only one bridge
then, look, which was the old bridge.
Oh my gosh.
Not the George Street Bridge, and we've got City Bridge now.
So you could be queuing way down on Corporation Road, or Chepster Road, because the lorries
took over.
And then you had to camp up the road, yeah, with all the Irishmen.
Really?
Yeah.
You know where NRW is now, well, Caldercott and Wendtl was, but just up the road there,
coming towards me on the left-hand side, there was an hostel there.
There was even a church they put in there for the Irishmen, they were all Irish.
Really?
Mm-hmm.
They were there building, they were the main ones on the stewardess, and they'd go to
a town on a Friday night, come home drunk, and the old, no, I don't call them, a priest
would be collecting them up, because there used to be a garage there selling petrol where
NRW is now, German's Garage.
Really?
When we had a car then, we picked our petrol up there, and he used to shoe horses as well
for anybody to ride.
He had his thing in the back, Mr. German did, where he showed the horses, and he had two
petrol pumps there.
Wow.
And behind that was the hostel.
Just, you know where Geoff said he was born, that farm opposite?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And that side of the road, just around the bend, you'll see like a lot of rubble now.
Yeah.
And that was the hostel where the Irishmen was.
And they had a little church there as well?
Yeah, and they used to go to town, get drunk, and oh, it was, you never come along that
road on a Saturday night because they'd be all over the road.
Oh.
And the priest would be rounding them up and taking them in.
I've not heard that before.
Yes.
Where?
Up on that road, near a new port, there was a caravan site for the workers on the steelworks.
Really?
Yeah.
And they had a church up on there as well, and a supermarket, like not today, like a
corp on there.
Yeah.
I used to go in and get stuff, and a post office and all that.
Oh my goodness.
That must have been, do you remember the village of Lambwine?
Yes.
What was it like?
Well, by the, do you know where the golf club is?
Yeah.
Well, that Tennyson Avenue, was it?
Or Tennyson Road, I think, because we used to pedal our bikes over the railway.
Did you?
And then go up around the Martin and come back home along the moor.
Well, there was nowhere else to go, you know.
Yes.
And then there was Banffam.
We used to turn up by there, but like the little village was there by the Milton and
all that, and few around by there.
Do you know anyone who worked there at Lambwine?
Did it employ a lot of local people?
Yes.
I mean, a lot of people from around here worked when the work started, you know.
But it was mainly the Irish that was...
That Irish Navvies that were building it.
Yeah.
Oh my gosh.
What about, so you were born in 41?
41, January.
Do you remember the winter of 47?
Yes.
Yes, where the sheep, we had snow, a bad winter, and you'd go out in the field out there and
all you'd see was the poor sheep and their nostrils showing.
And Dad used to, and Uncle and my two brothers, not me, because I mean, the snow was...
Yeah.
Oh, I remember that well.
Wow.
Was it cut off here then?
Yeah.
Yes, we were cut off.
Gosh.
And was it the same in 63?
That's another bad winter.
That was another one, yes.
We could get from here with a tractor then, because you had tractors then, you know.
So you got from here.
I mean, you didn't go out there, you went and did any shopping.
So in 47 was it...
But in those days, see, you had shopping.
There was a lot more local shops than there is now.
Yeah.
So, Mum would go up as far as Kendal's, which was only opposite Lissowerry High School,
where my grandkids go.
Yeah.
Well, and where they went.
There was the shop there.
Yeah.
Kendal's had that shop, and he had the shop farther up, and then the baker was on that
roundabout by Aldi's.
Oh, really?
The baker.
So you only had to get on the tractor then, you could go in 63, and get the bread out
of the bakehouse there.
Mr. Haynes was there, and you'd get the bread off him.
Yeah.
I can remember all that before the school was built up there and all.
Lissowerry School College and all that.
So all that area, and the area where all that shopping centre is, you know...
Yeah, it was all farmland.
That was all farmland.
That's hard to believe, isn't it?
It is.
And when I look at how Newport have grown in all ways, do you know what I mean?
Yeah, yeah.
And I'm thinking, well, it was only those houses on Nash Road, as I call Nash Road by
Lissowerry, there was only the houses there.
There was nothing behind them.
Now there's all Pont Fein, what do you call it, Crescent, the other side.
No, that was all land.
Well, that was wartime buildings on that side of the road.
You know those banglows?
Yeah.
What do you call them?
Prefabs.
They were there, and another lot on Chepstow Road.
But I can remember when I used to go to school, none of Allway or all that was ever built.
So it was all farmland?
All farmland, yes.
The head of the
There was the Endrew Farm up there, on the left, when you went up there, yeah.
Because they were butchers in the town.
Auntie Rose Thompson.
No relation of ours, but I just had to call her Auntie Rose because she's mam's friend.
So you're only 78, which isn't that old, and you've seen all these changes.
Yeah.
There was none of those houses there when I went to school.
So it was a very rural area.
Yeah, it was all rural right up, yeah.
So did the M4 coming through affect you at all here? Was that noticed?
No, it was noticed.
Yeah.
But that you got off at Magor and then you was like, but the other one that will come through will come not far from Pike Corner, won't it? If it comes.
If it comes through.
What do you think about that?
Well, we do need something in Newport because we're gridlocked only nearly all the time now.
You can be queuing back to Pike Corner to get into town if you don't go early.
Yes.
But I think what done that was, they put that road through Lanwerne.
Well, it brought the traffic quicker, didn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, instead of coming along this road, they come straight through now.
And I think it's quicker. It's got to the bridge and it's jamming us up.
Do you know what? You see coaches come along our top road now sometimes.
What, to avoid the traffic?
To avoid the traffic.
To avoid the traffic, but they're not getting anywhere because they only turn and before you turn back to go back on or go straight up, you're queuing.
It's crazy.
It took me to go to the school. Well, Lane took me up to school because they had a concert on.
She took the kids up. She said, Mom, hurry up. You're going to have to wait. Come quickly. She said, because we're going queuing.
It took us three quarters of an hour to do two and a half miles to get to the school.
It's off walking, aren't you? Really? Or cycling?
Or cycling.
Do you know what? I haven't cycled a bike for years. I don't know.
What about the trains? Did you ever use trains as a child?
Yes. Dad had to go to Gloucester, look. Pedal up to Lanwerne Station on the bike, get on the train there to Gloucester and do the same coming home.
Gloucester Market was right by the railway lines in Gloucester, look.
So I know where Gloucester Market is.
Oh, where it is now. Oh, where it used to be in the town. Yeah, when Dad would get off the train and you only sort of come down, you were in the market.
So what if he bought anything?
Oh, there was always a cattle lorry. No, he didn't have a cattle lorry in the beginning.
But in the beginning, did they come back on the train with him?
No. There was a lorry from this area. It was either Mr Arthur, Mr Rees or who else used to fetch it down. But there was always a lorry to bring whenever he bought home.
And would you ever go with him to Gloucester?
Yeah.
Really?
Yeah, Mam used to want to get rid of me, didn't she?
So you were both cycled to...
Lanwerne. Put our bikes in the station.
Were they trained up then or would you just leave them there?
No, put them in a little hut in there. And then you'd go on the train, look all the way. Well, Dad had a cousin living just outside Gloucester.
Yeah.
In Minsterworth.
Minsterworth?
Yeah.
I was brought up in Minsterworth.
Were you?
Yeah, where in Minsterworth?
Erm, what's the name of it? Well, Harvey's the name was. Do you remember Harvey's?
Not John Harvey.
Harvey's the poet?
No, there was a John and Agnes Harvey who used to run the shop in Minsterworth by the butchers.
Hunter Gladys she was. She was Dad's first cousin.
Oh, that's really funny.
And erm...
It's on the River Severn.
Yeah. And she'd come into Gloucester and pick me up and take me back there. And fetch me back if I wanted to come back. She didn't have any children. She was married late in life.
But her brother was Harvey the poet.
Harvey the poet? Who's he?
Yeah, he was a soldier. Remember he was the soldier poet?
Oh really?
And he's buried in... yeah, the church up there.
That's amazing.
I've got his poetry books upstairs.
Have you?
Yeah.
So this was, well this would have been a steam train and...
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Go to Gloucester. Dad had fall asleep. It used to worry me. Because I think, well how do you know to get off?
It was a station. Oh my gosh.
Yeah, I used to go with him regularly to Gloucester.
What about the Severn Bridge? Do you remember when that was opened?
Yes, I remember it being built.
Do you?
Yeah.
Because I would have been about 17 would I then? No.
Yeah. And does it make a big... I mean what do you remember about it being built?
Erm... remember that you could go over the other side of the water.
Yeah.
Without going all the way up around. Or unless you went over on the...
Severn Tunnel?
Yeah. Or... Williamson's Down here used to have a... what do you call it? Take you across on the water. A boat.
Really?
Yeah.
Where from?
From Chesby. Where the Severn Bridge was. It went down... because I went to school in Chesby. Look, see? So I know all Bullwok and all that.
And you could take your car on this boat.
Yeah.
Oh, God, what was it called?
Not Oust.
Oust?
Port Scuett.
No, farther up than that.
Sadbrook.
No, farther up. It was in Chepstow. It was...
Well, once the Severn Bridge got built, you know, people never used it. It was like transporting you from this side to the other.
You drove your car on it and you'd go over the other. It might have been Oust. He was on...
Yeah, I think there is a famous Oust it is.
What was it like going across? Because it looks a bit precarious in photographs I've seen.
I only went over once.
Really?
And that was with Geoff's auntie. She took us over on this boat. Well, and drove the car on it. If you went up and it was on it.
So you said that Williams, they live around here?
Well, that is the Williams.
Oh, the Andrean Williams?
Yeah, his father had it.
Ah, right, okay.
He's only moved down here since they sold that up there. Look, he hadn't always been down here. No, it's only like late turn.
Ah, what about... Would you know the names of all the reams on your land?
Yes.
You do? Yeah.
And what, further afield?
As far as Redwick.
As far as... Do you?
Yeah.
So when you're driving along in your car, could you say, oh, that's such and such and that's such and such?
Could you? That's really impressive.
Yeah, because, like, Dad was from Redwick.
Yeah.
Um, I suppose Redwick, although I've always lived here, born here and all that, I've always got a love for Redwick.
I suppose because Dad's... My two brothers are buried here. One is buried over here, don't they?
Did you marry there?
Yes. Yes, in Redwick Church.
Do you remember the shop then? The little shop?
Yes, on the bottom by the crossroads.
Yeah, run by one of the howls, was it?
Yes. Now... Hang on.
Um, yes, Howells's mother had it, wasn't it? Mrs. Howells's mother.
Mrs. Howells's grandmother. Duck Howells's grandmother, I think, had it.
Yeah.
I think, or something like that.
Now, wasn't the daughter there adopted or a niece?
Yes. Yes. His mother was adopted, yeah.
Yeah, that's it.
Yeah.
What was her name?
Oh, I used to go to that shop because when I said to you about Auntie Daisy, if on light nights you were in the shop,
you know, you could walk across the Islet ground, as I call it, up Mead Lane.
Yeah.
And then you came out by the church and then just walked along there.
And then she'd buy me some sweets and we'd get her a bit of shopping, then we'd walk back down the Islet.
And I tell you what we used to do, I don't know if we're allowed to do it today.
In the Islet ground, there were lovely cow slips.
Cow slips. So I always used to pick a bunch of cow slips from them.
But you're not supposed to pick them today, are you?
Oh, really? How lovely.
Oh, it was full of cow slips. The Island ground was, and the Island ground is right at the bottom.
When Mead Lane comes into the steelworks, which they made the road down there, you just go that way, through that gateway,
and two fields in was the Island ground.
The Highland ground?
Yeah, it was called the Island ground.
Why was it called that?
Well, it had a little bit of a mound in it or something.
And they picked some cow slips when they were out.
Never dug any up mine or nothing like that.
But you're not supposed to pick them today, are you?
I mowed some in my garden the other day.
Well, they were just going over.
Oh, going over. But I don't think you're supposed to pick them though.
Oh, you lovely, lovely, pretty, fetch on for a man.
They were so pretty. I used to suck the honey out of them.
Oh yes, you could, yeah.
Oh, there are other things, like wildlife and things that you used to see when you were a child that you don't see now at the levels.
For example, I've spoken to people who...
Curly, I don't think I see so much as I used to. You know, they had a...
Yeah.
I don't see so much of them.
Hairs?
Oh, I've got quite a few hairs.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, that's lovely. Oh, that's lovely.
I love them. And they seem to...
Well, they do breed in where you leave a little bit of long grass.
And we've always left at the bottom, and by the 10 acres, a little bit of long grass and tidy grass.
It looks untidy, but it's left there.
Because that's where...
I don't see so many partridges as we used to, neither.
Yeah.
Because they used to hatch a lot on the fields, don't you?
Oh, really?
Did you ever get otters down here?
We've got otters, yes, but we've got otters coming back now.
Yeah.
I'd seen one the other day in Chaperwene.
Did you?
Apparently, they're... I couldn't make out what it was.
I thought, that's not a mink.
Because we did have mink, you know, where somebody had let some go or something.
Were they a problem for you?
Yeah, well, they'd get in, and we only got a few chicken.
But, you know, they seemed to burrow their ways into the chicken houses if they got no bones then,
and they couldn't get into any little hole.
We had one, and we only had six chicken hen in a chicken house and killed a lot.
Oh, no.
And we had seen one.
We don't know whether it done it, but we'd seen one coming across our pond,
where they were used on the lane.
And I shut them in.
I know I shut the door and all that night and went to let them go next morning.
And they were all dead in there.
No, well, and it was only a little hole about that big that he burrowed through.
Yeah, they're slinky.
Yeah, like if they got no bones.
And we blamed it on the mink anyway.
Did you? I was talking to somebody the other day over towards Peterstone,
and she remembers as a child seeing the otter hounds down there.
Yes.
Did you ever have them here?
Yes, but they didn't do much good our side because I think our ditches are a bit deeper than the other side.
They came twice, the otters, and they didn't have anything.
They didn't see anything, they said.
But I think the ditches are a bit more deeper our side than...
Do you remember what they wore?
Was it blue and red stockings, I wonder?
Or was it red tops on stockings? Was it all red?
Oh, that's interesting they were here.
What about the beagles?
Yeah, but they're no good from down here because of the water.
Oh, really?
They can't, you know, they can't get going.
They do come down Greenmoor, they meet once a year.
Yes.
And that all comes down at Harrison, I think it is, fetches them down.
But they chase, but the fox, they always gets away.
Because they can jump the water, can't they?
And the owls before they can get whatever they are on the trace, they can't do it, you know.
I mean they couldn't use horses down here, they could only walk in any case.
The thing that interests me, Cath, is this area, is that high tide you're below sea level.
Sea level, yeah.
Do you ever think about that? Does it ever worry you?
No.
No?
Never think about it, no.
And have you ever seen floods here?
Yes.
Coming over the wall?
Yes. And we have been flooded here where we couldn't get out.
Really?
One was up to our gate that comes on the back.
Yeah.
And all Chapel Road in the low bits then was all flooded over, you know, we couldn't either...
Yeah, we have been flooded here, but never up to the house.
But we never think of...
Oh, we'd have to get a boat, wouldn't we?
Never think of being actual flooded.
When was the Great Floods?
Well, you mean...
In the churches and all that.
1606 I think it was.
Yeah, because they say that was a tsunami, don't they, already?
Yeah.
Yeah, no, I didn't see that.
So what caused the flood that time then, when you were here?
It was coming over the wall.
And I tell you, one day we went up...
Was it Linmouth got flooded?
Yes.
Well, I shouldn't say it, but it was a good job, because that night we went to see it,
because it was lapping over the wall, and we went to see it down the corridor, because
we got land on the corridor, steelworks, you know, which goes to the sea wall.
And we went up there and it was just about to come over the wall.
And then next day, because I thought, oh Jesus, we've got land, we've got cattle down here.
That must be so daunting seeing that.
I was worried about the cattle, you know.
Well, then next day on the news, when I put on the wireless, Linmouth had had it, and
I thought, oh thank God it went that way and not our way.
Because I mean, we're more or less opposite of it.
Yeah.
That we would have had it then, because we went down just to see and sit on the wall
to see what was happening, and it was just about that much starting to...
Yeah.
Do you keep an eye on weather conditions then, just in case of the high tides and...
Well, they are looking after us quite well now.
Yeah.
They do put the boards, if it's going to be really to stop it coming up.
But if the boards...
Well, no, we've got new boards now, haven't we?
Yes, where they wind them.
You could get salt water right up through Chapel Ream when the tides was really going,
when we had the old boards, because I think the weight and the drift of it would move them.
Oh yeah, you get salt water right past us here.
Really?
Crikey.
So how far are we from the seawall here?
What would it be?
About a mile and a half, we're really...
Crikey.
Right down the road.
Yeah.
Yeah, because there's one at the bottom there, isn't there?
The gout.
Yeah.
Oh no, there's no wall there, is there?
It's just a filter off, isn't there?
So do you still have grips on your land?
Yeah.
Still got the old grips.
We've never been drained, you know.
Because they work effectively for you.
Yeah, when your grip's full up, you know, go on the end.
But I tell them it's the tractors they're driving that cracks the pipes on the end.
Do you think so?
Well, it's got to be weight on it.
It only used to be cows or horses, didn't it?
Or, well, the tractors are getting heavier and heavier.
And bigger and bigger.
Bigger, yeah.
So in your father's time, was it still horse drawn?
Yeah.
Do you remember that?
Do you?
Yeah, I used to ride the horse.
We had a horse.
They'd make the A-Ricks in the field.
Yeah.
And they used to have a horse in front of it like a wooden sweep.
And they'd row it up and the horse would be pulling it up.
Yeah, Dad used to chuck me on there, put me on their backs.
Really?
To ride the horse down.
So are there any words that you've used around here that might not be used anywhere else?
I never thought of that.
All traditions or myths or ghost stories or folk stories.
I did love the folk stories.
But I don't know.
Any old characters that you remember around here?
Yes, old Mad Jack, Derby Joe, old Bob Groves.
Who were they?
They used to come around when you were busy and live in your couch head or something like
that and have food and do work on the farms.
Really?
Yeah.
Do you know where they...
Bill Newport.
There was lots of them.
Do you know where they came from or anything like that and their background?
No.
No?
Are you too young to remember the war?
Yeah, I was born in 41.
So you wouldn't remember?
I was born when it was...
Apparently...
Well, this house here had all the windows...
Bombs dropped on the shed on the end of the house and blew all the windows in.
Mamma always used to...
Oh, don't it sound daft.
Put us under the kitchen table.
I've heard that from several people actually.
But it does sound daft, doesn't it?
What would the kitchen table do?
And we still got the same table in the kitchen now.
You haven't.
I have.
It was a good table then.
Yeah, I'll show it to you.
In my kitchen there, the table...
It's the table I can always remember.
What?
From a kid sat at the same table.
So would you...
We haven't altered it a lot.
Do you know what I mean?
Yeah.
I've got a junk room upstairs.
I expect everybody have.
Which...
Lots of things in there.
I got lots of photographs too when I get down to digging around in there.
If you have any photographs, I would love to see them.
Yeah, I got photographs up there.
Yeah, you might need to dig around for them.
Yeah.
So what is it? What's special about this place, this area?
What's special?
Well, I think it's special because we got...
On the part of the farm here too, we've got an ancient monument where you can't dig.
It's like a tent where they say it was a burial ground.
Really?
So you don't touch it.
You can't blow it. You don't do anything to it. You can mow it. You can graze it.
But you're not allowed to...
Disturb it?
No, you're not allowed to do a... What do they do? Metal detector?
You're not allowed to do anything.
That's by the cottage that joins us on the far end of the farm.
Apparently it was the man from the ancient monument's core one day.
And I think he... Yeah, he did. He gave me photographs of what it looked like.
Yeah.
And was it TP's or something?
That was on there. And he said, it's a burial ground there.
And I said, oh!
And laughed. He said, you're not allowed to touch it, he said. You're not allowed to level it off.
The field sort of... It's that high and then it seems to go in a dip.
I wonder how old is it?
Oh, it's old.
Yeah.
But we're not allowed to touch anything.
He comes and checks the house, mine, because this is a grade two listed building.
Is it? How old is it?
It's on the front. I think a bit was rebuilt. 18 something.
Oh gosh.
Oh yeah, because there, that's got to stay there. Look, that wall there.
That's years ago. They kept cows in there.
Oh really?
Next door then.
Yeah.
And that was, was it a filter through? And you see where the bricks are on the top?
They used to put the fodder out through there to feed the animals the other side of the wall.
Oh my god.
But that's the old beam and...
So that's new, that bit in there?
No, that was the old cellar. Look, the old flagstone stay you got to...
Oh my god.
The food is there. There's a slab there, look, where they used to salt the...
Yeah, you have to get up. You have to get up.
Isn't that awful?
Just round here?
Yeah, see where the television is?
Oh, that's where they used to salt the pig?
Yeah.
You still got that?
That's amazing. Wow.
That's the...
Doesn't it have an orchard here?
Yeah, the orchard's out there.
Is it still there now?
Yeah.
Oh, that is?
Oh my god. When I was a kid there was trees I used to climb up and they're still there.
So...
It's got to be...
I don't know. 70 years or more, isn't it?
So did you ever have a cider press here?
Yeah. Well, yeah, there was a cider press but we used to have a travelling press.
A man come around and do the cider in the front yard, I got photographs of that somewhere.
Melville Jones.
That's the one!
Yeah.
Who was he then? Was he a local?
Local and he travelled the press and he'd do it with... they'd pick the apples and they'd put them in and press it down.
The cider went in like a troll. I can remember all that.
Oh, if you find those photographs I would love to see them.
I know, I can.
Yeah. Yeah.
Give me time.
Is there anything else you'd like to add, Kath?
Oh, I don't think so. I don't know. There's lots of things that you think of them.
Yeah. Oh, did you ever go to Whitsun Sioux?
Yes, Mrs Mayberry, Whitsun Sioux, yes.
It was lovely.
Yeah.
She was a lovely old lady.
Was she?
Oh, she was lovely.
Yeah.
And in her latter years she had a deer at the Sioux, right?
And she had to keep it tethered down because every time she'd let it go it landed here with us.
In the end she'd give it to us.
She gave you the deer?
Yeah. Well, it stayed with our cattle. We fed it in the shed and all. It would stay with her.
And she'd be fed up coming to get it and then they tethered it over there.
But it was coming up here to you?
Yes, it was coming across the hills. Because like the Sioux was already just like there across.
Yeah.
And it stayed with our cattle all the time. And she said in the end, she said, oh, I'm going to give you the deer.
She said, leave it home. And never left us. It died in the shed up the common. Happy with us. Never bothered as long as we were there.
And what used to amuse me, she used to take all, if you had an animal die, you took it over to her and she'd put it into the lions.
She had lions there.
Yes, yes, I heard that, yeah.
But oh, she had to keep these lions in. Oh, a good fence around there, yeah.
Yeah.
But like the old fashioned chain arrows, you know, what they pull behind the level of ground.
And then I'll always remember, she used to open up, we used to get money for the church.
She did and all that. She'd open one of her rooms and we'd play whist in the house there.
Yeah, about once a month she'd have us playing whist. We'd be playing whist and all the money went to charity.
She was lovely.
And...
Did you see the lions and the bears there?
Yes. Yeah, well, no, this is what I was going to tell you.
She had, people used to take, they used to have trips out from town, you know, to see them.
Well, of course, she put the two bears together this day when this trip was coming.
Well, they arrived and all of a sudden they started to fight and one nearly killed the other.
But the two bears did together. Oh, she was a lovely lady.
I mean, someone was telling me over at Porton that they could sometimes hear the lion roar.
Yeah, we heard you when the wind was in our direction.
Really?
And she had peacocks and all their luck. Well, you could hear them squawking. Monkeys she had, she had everything.
And I'll always remember this one day. The monkeys had broke out.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah? Well, the vet had to come to shoot them and we were having to...
Who was the vet then?
What are you doing down here with the gun? Why I didn't want to see you, Kathy, he said.
What are you doing? He said, I've got to shoot, there's a couple monkeys up the tree over there.
He said, and I'm going to go shoot these monkeys.
And we laughed, I didn't believe him. And he said, yeah.
All right, then I said, we'll sit on the road and wait. No, we'll come back along after and see if you had them.
Yeah, you shot him. I said two or three, he chopped these monkeys.
I think Margaret was telling me that.
Yeah.
Just going back to the cider, so did your dad make cider?
Where did he keep it?
Yeah, where that kitchen is there. That was the cider casks used to be on things and barrels. I still got a couple of them.
Really?
The taps that you tap into the...
And was it just for your own consumption?
Well, yeah, but everybody had come here and sort of had cider. I can remember about four or five, they'd arrive and they'd be drinking cider and not drunk.
Yeah, just sociable.
Yeah.
And I think, yes, dad used to play, because he used to come from Redwick to you as well.
What did he use to play? A game called Penny something?
Shove Penny.
Really?
And I think they used to play with, you know...
This must have been a fantastic place to grow up in here.
You know, there's lots of things.
He sounds like quite a character.
Yeah, he was. He went to town, somebody brought a rabbit for me. Oh, hang on, I think it was...
Oh, I can't think of her name now, but I always wanted a rabbit, right?
So on a Wednesday, he said when he left, he was... this lady, oh, God, I don't know what her name was, bringing me in a rabbit.
Well, dad used to ride his bike to Newport Market, look, before we had a car.
Yeah.
Right?
Well, it wasn't far up there. And he took a bag with him, or a frame or a bag on the bike, right?
Well, then he'd gone and had a drink in the White Hart pub.
Yeah.
Well, coming home with the rabbit on the bike, he killed my rabbit because he fell off the bike or the bag got caught in the wheel. I cried my eyes out.
Oh, my goodness.
Yeah.
I shouldn't laugh, really.
No, I didn't at the time because I broke my heart. I was looking forward to this rabbit. They'd even made me a little wooden hatch.
But the rabbit... I think it had either got caught in the wheel or...
One of the others.
Yeah.
And he brought the dead rabbit home.
Oh.
Baby chicken in the garden.
Oh, my goodness.
Yeah, oh, hi, the shawls and the rabbit.
So was there a livestock market in Newport?
Yeah.
Was it a big one?
Yeah. Yeah. Well, I used to go to it.
Did you cycle with your dad?
Yeah. And then when my two brothers died, look, I was left here then to farm the thing.
And I used to go to the Newport market every Wednesday, take the stock in, you know, in a box to market.
Then they went to Abergavenny, they closed, they went to Abergavenny and now it's Raglan.
But it was a... Yes, because they still got a little bit of the old market. They didn't let them take it down, did they?
Well, as there was, yeah.
Yeah.
But the docks, did you ever go to the docks?
Yeah. Yes, because we used to love to go to see the docks on a Sunday because you were allowed in there.
Yes.
And you pedal your bikes, look, and you go and watch the ships and the big ships and nobody ever saw you.
Really?
But now you can't get in there now, can you?
No, it's all securities.
Yeah. Yeah.
It's all securities.
You can't get... I went to a funeral once, but I jibbed on going out on the boat. She wanted her ashes spread out to sea, look, and on the tugboat would they take him out on it?
Yeah.
Well, it was Auntie Clara's sister, I know what it was, and Auntie Clara lost her sight, so I used to take her and the rest of them, they had no children, wherever they wanted to go, I'd take them, it didn't embarrass me.
I mean, he used to like a drop of drink, Uncle Perth's did, and there was a club on Conwy Road in Newport, it was men only, right? Pioneer Club.
And he got that he couldn't go, because I used to take him on a Wednesday, pick him up on the way back home from market, he had a couple hours there with his mates, you know.
But he got then he couldn't go.
How am I going to manage, because you know women are allowed in, I was allowed to go in and pick him up, but you couldn't have a drink or anything, you know, but I never drank him alive.
So I'd go and pick him up on a Wednesday, Kathy said I don't think I'll be able to come much more, he said I'm getting feeble.
Well, alright then, I wonder could you pick it up for me, I said, but they might not serve me, you know, we'd better make sure they'll, I'll take your crate up and bring it back.
So the following week he, I went in and Stuart, Stuart, aren't they in the club, he said, you're Kathy, aren't you? Yes, I said, he said, yeah, my wife says she knows you, because she's usually here on a Wednesday.
Oh, what trouble am I in now? Because I was allowed to go in and pick him up, look he'd be sat in a chair and all that.
No trouble at all, he said, but we're going to let you come in and pick his case up every week, you bring the empties and you can pay for it for him.
And then he said you can bring him up to the Christmas party, they'll allow you to stay with him if he wants.
Oh, I laughed, but you won't be allowed to drink in your mind, but you can stay with him, because his sight was going about you.
That is so funny, isn't it?
And it was funny, and my mother was alive then and she said, the jobs you do, you're going to get into trouble one day, I said, you've got to help somebody when they're going blind.
But then his wife went into hospital, now this was the funniest part, because we've got another farm up the road and they lived on the end, right?
She had cancer, and she had to go in to have her breasts removed, and he'd only go in with me, right?
Well then, Auntie Clara was there a fortnight, and I thought, oh my God, he wouldn't allow it, I could go in the kitchen, I tidied that up, but I thought, oh I wonder what the bed is like, you know?
Because there was news now, she was coming home, I thought, oh my God, he'd been sleeping up there.
So I said to him, I said, Uncle Perth, I'm coming up tomorrow, alright, he said, do you know, I went up there the following day, I said, I'm going upstairs to strip your bed, I know it all is clean.
He said, oh you can't go upstairs, he said, people will talk about us.
Now he was so deep-lied, I said, don't be so stupid.
He said, well he said, if you do, draw the curtains, so as nobody can see you upstairs.
Oh my God.
Well I thought it was hilarious, so that night then, I went in, took him in to see Auntie Clara, she said, hope to be home on the weekend, I said, well I've been up and stripped all the beds and all that, I said, but you'll never guess.
Oh, what have you done?
Well I said, he wouldn't let me go upstairs to start with, he said, because people would be talking.
But I said, he did then, allow me upstairs, but I had to draw the curtains so as nobody could see you, for they were going on the road, I was upstairs changing the bed.
Oh, just priceless, that's wonderful.
And we laughed over it, and always, you know, I mean, she finished up in her home, but every so often she'd say, I can never forget Perth being like that with you.
Well, of course, I was only about 30 and he was about 70-odd, you know, it was so funny, I never dreamt of it.
I thought, go up and strip the beds and put them all clean and put the cleaner around, because she didn't have a hoover in those days, look.
It was a pusher, well, or carry the mats downstairs and shake them and mop around.
It'd be lovely for her to come home, well, it'd be, you know, but he didn't mind me doing it downstairs, look.
He didn't like me upstairs.
I think he was all on edge, that he wanted me to...
Well, I said, it's very traditional and worried about what people would say, they saw a woman up there, maybe...
Yeah, but I was always there, like downstairs, but, you know, I think...
I laughed, I couldn't believe it, I couldn't stop laughing, I thought, oh my God, would they think like that?
Well, you'd be amazed, wouldn't you really, sometimes?
Yeah, but she was in hospital, they had no children or anything, you know.
Oh, he was having, he had a good job on the railway.
What was he doing?
He was over, oh, didcot.
Yeah?
He was up a didcot, he had one of the boss's jobs up a didcot.
Really?
And she was a schoolteacher, Auntie Clara was, never had no children, they didn't, I don't know whether they could or didn't want to, I don't know.
I don't suppose there are any diaries in your family or letters or receipts and that sort of thing, Kath, at all?
It could be in the drawer upstairs.
In my junk room.
In my junk room?
I just want to check, let me just check this.
So, we've been talking for an hour and a half, should I turn it off now?
Yes, you better.
I mean, I'm always aware when I...